The Project Gutenberg eBook, Jacob's Ladder, by E. Phillips Oppenheim,
Illustrated by F. Vaux Wilson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Jacob's Ladder


Author: E. Phillips Oppenheim



Release Date: June 7, 2010  [eBook #32732]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACOB'S LADDER***


E-text prepared by D Alexander and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 32732-h.htm or 32732-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32732/32732-h/32732-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32732/32732-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/jacobsladder00oppe





JACOB'S LADDER

by

E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

With Frontispiece by F. Vaux Wilson







Boston
Little, Brown, and Company
1921

Copyright, 1921,
By Little, Brown, and Company.

All rights reserved

Published February, 1921

The Colonial Press
C. H. Simonds Co., Boston, U. S. A.




[Illustration: "I AM OBLIGED TO YOU ALL FOR PUTTING UP WITH MY
COMPANY FOR SO LONG." FRONTISPIECE. _See page 17._]




JACOB'S LADDER




PROLOGUE


Seated at breakfast on that memorable July morning, Jacob Pratt
presented all the appearance of a disconsolate man. His little country
sitting-room was as neat and tidy as the capable hands of the
inimitable Mrs. Harris could make it. His coffee was hot and his eggs
were perfectly boiled. Through the open windows stretched a little
vista of the many rows of standard roses which had been the joy of his
life. Yet blank misery dwelt in the soul of this erstwhile cheerful
little man, and the spirit of degradation hung like a gloomy pall over
his thoughts and being. Only the day before he had filed his petition
in bankruptcy.

The usual morning programme was carried out, only, alas! in different
fashion. Five and twenty minutes before the departure of the train,
Mrs. Harris--but not the Mrs. Harris of customary days--presented
herself, bearing his hat and stick. Her cheerful smile had departed.
There were traces of something very much like tears in her eyes. She
carried a small article in her hand, which she spent most of the time
trying to conceal behind her apron.

"You'll be home at the usual time, sir?" she asked.

"So far as I know, Mrs. Harris," was the listless reply.

His landlady looked at the practically undisturbed breakfast table and
gathered strength of purpose.

"Me and Harris, sir," she declared, "we offers our respects and we
hopes nothing ain't going to be changed here."

"You are very good--both of you," Jacob said, with a weak smile. "For
the present I don't think that I could live cheaper anywhere else,
nor, I am sure, as comfortably. I have had quite a decent situation
offered me. The only thing is I may be away a little more."

"That's good news, sir, anyway," the woman replied heartily. "I mean
to say," she added, "it's good news about your staying on here. And me
and Harris," she went on, "having no children, so to speak, and you
having paid liberal and regular for the last four years, we seem to
have a bit of money we've no use for," she added, producing at last
that bulging purse, "and we thought maybe you might do us the
honour--"

Jacob took her by the shoulders and shook her.

"For God's sake, don't, Mrs. Harris!" he broke in. "If I want it, I'll
come to you. And--God bless you!"

Whereupon he picked up his hat and stick, stepped through the open
French window, cut a rose for his buttonhole as usual, and started on
his purgatorial walk, making a tremendous effort to look as though
nothing had happened.

That walk, alas! surpassed his worst imaginings. Jacob Pratt was a
sensitive little man, notwithstanding his rotund body, his fresh
complexion and humorous mouth; and all the way from his modest abode
to the railway station, he was a prey to fancies which were in some
cases, without a doubt, founded upon fact. Mr. Gregson, the manager of
the International Stores, at the passing of his discredited customer
had certainly retreated from his position on the threshold of his
shop, usual at that hour of the morning, and disclosed a morbid but
absorbing interest in a tub of margarine. The greengrocer's wife had
looked at him reproachfully from behind a heap of cooking apples, and
her response to his diffident greeting was accompanied by a sorrowful
wag of the head. The newspaper boy at the entrance to the station had
extended his _Express_ almost doubtfully and had clutched with
significant caution at the copper coin tendered in exchange for it.
The station master had answered his "Good morning" without troubling
to turn his head, and the ticket collector had yawned as he moved
away from the barrier. Each one of these incidents, trifling though
they were in themselves, had been like pinpricks of humiliation to the
little man whose geniality had been almost a byword.

The worst trial of all, however, arrived when Jacob entered the
carriage in which he had been accustomed, for six days out of seven,
to make his journey to the city. As usual, it was occupied by two men,
strangers to him commercially, but with whom he had developed a very
pleasant acquaintance; Mr. Stephen Pedlar, the well-known accountant
to the trade in which Jacob was interested; Mr. Lionel Groome, whose
life was spent in a strenuous endeavour to combine the two avocations
of man of fashion and liquid glue manufacturer; and--Mr. Edward
Bultiwell, of Bultiwell and Sons, Bermondsey, his former condescending
patron and occasional host, now, alas! his largest creditor. The
porter, being for the first time unaccountably absent, Jacob was
compelled to open the door for himself, thereby rendering his nervous
entrance more self-conscious than ever. He found himself confronted
and encircled by a solid wall of newspapers, stumbled over an
outstretched foot, relapsed into the vacant place and looked
helplessly around him. A kind word just then might not have helped the
lump in Jacob's throat, but it would certainly have brought a fortune
in later life to any one who had uttered it.

"Good morning, gentlemen," the newcomer ventured.

There was a muttered response from either side of him,--none from the
august figure in the opposite corner. Jacob fingered with tentative
wistfulness the very choice rose which he was wearing in his
buttonhole. Perhaps he ought not to have plucked and worn it. Perhaps
it ought not to have opened its soft, sweet petals for an owner who
was dwelling in the Valley of Impecunious Disgrace. Perhaps he ought
to have ended there and then the good-natured rivalry of years and
offered the cherished blossom to his silent creditor in the corner,
in place of the very inferior specimen which adorned the lapel of
the great man's coat. Even in that moment of humiliation, Jacob felt
a little thrill of triumph at the thought of Mr. Bultiwell's three
gardeners. It took more than gardeners to grow such a rose as he
was wearing. He liked to fancy that it took personal care, personal
sympathy, personal love. The sweetest and rarest flowers must have
their special atmosphere.

Quite suddenly Mr. Edward Bultiwell laid down his _Times_ and glared
across at Jacob. He was a large man, with an ugly red face, a neck
which hung over his collar in rolls, and a resonant voice. Directly
he began to speak, Jacob began to shiver.

"Pratt," he said, "am I to understand that the greeting which you
offered to the occupants of this carriage, when you entered, was
intended to include me?"

"I--I certainly meant it to," was the tremulous reply.

"Then let me beg that such a liberty be not repeated," Mr. Bultiwell
continued brutally. "I look upon a man who has compounded with his
creditors as a person temporarily, at any rate, outside the pale
of converse with his fellows on--er--equal terms. I look upon your
presence in a first-class carriage, wearing a floral adornment,"
Mr. Bultiwell added, with a jealous glance at the very beautiful
rose, "which is, to say the least of it, conspicuous, as--er--an
impertinence to those who have had the misfortune to suffer from
your insolvency."

The healthy colour faded from Jacob's cheeks. He had the air of one
stricken by a lash--dazed for the moment and bewildered.

"My rose cost me nothing," he faltered, "and my season ticket doesn't
expire till next month. I must go up to the City. My help is
needed--with the books."

Mr. Bultiwell shook his paper preparatory to disappearing behind it.

"Your presence here may be considered a matter of taste," he fired
off, as a parting shot. "I call it damned bad taste!"

Mr. Jacob Pratt sat like a hurt thing till the train stopped at the
next station. Then he stumbled out on to the platform, and, making
his way through an unaccountable mist, he climbed somehow or other
into a third-class carriage. Richard Dauncey, the melancholy man who
lived in the cottage opposite to his, looked up at the newcomer's
entrance, and, for the first time within his recollection, Jacob saw
him smile.

"Good morning, Mr. Pratt," the former said, with a strenuous attempt
at cordiality. "If you'll excuse my saying so, that's the finest rose
I've ever seen in my life."

Richard Dauncey made his fortune by that speech--and Jacob had to
swallow very hard and look very fixedly out of the window.




CHAPTER I


Precisely two years later, Jacob Pratt sat once more in his cottage
sitting-room, contemplating the remains of a barely tasted breakfast.
Before him, read for the fiftieth time, were the wonderful letters, in
his brain a most amazing confusion, in his heart an almost hysterical
joy. Presently Mrs. Harris brought in his hat and stick.

"You'll excuse my mentioning it, sir," she said, looking at the former
a little disparagingly, "but, brush though I may, there's no doing
much with this hat of yours. The nap's fair gone. Maybe you haven't
noticed it, sir, but, with the summer coming on, a straw hat--"

"I'll buy a straw hat to-day, Mrs. Harris," Jacob promised.

"And you'll be home at the usual time for your supper, sir?"

"I--I expect so. I am not quite sure, Mrs. Harris. I shall be home
sometime during the day, all right."

Mrs. Harris shook her head at the sight of the untasted egg.

"You'll excuse my saying so, sir," she pronounced severely, "but
there's no good work done on an empty stomach. Times is hard, as we
all know, but eggs is cheap."

"Mrs. Harris," Jacob reminded her, "it is two years since I left one
of your eggs. I left it then because I was miserable. I am leaving
it this morning because--I have had good news. I can't eat. Later
on--later on, Mrs. Harris."

"And a bit of good news is what you deserve, sir," the latter
declared, lingering while he cut his accustomed rose with fingers
which trembled strangely.

"Thank you very much, Mrs. Harris," he said. "When I come back
to-night, I'll tell you all about it."

Once more, then, two years almost to a day after Mr. Edward Bultiwell,
of the great firm of Bultiwell and Sons, had laid down his newspaper
and spoken his mind, Jacob was on his way to the station, again
wearing a choice rose in his buttonhole. He had found no occasion to
change his lodgings, for he had been an economical man who took great
care of his possessions even in the days of his prosperity, and his
moderate salary as traveller for a Bermondsey firm of merchants
brought him in quite enough for his simple needs. He had to some
extent lived down his disgrace. The manager of the International
Stores nodded to him now, a trifle condescendingly, yet with tacit
acknowledgement of the fact that in domestic affairs Jacob was a man
of principle who always paid his way. The greengrocer's wife passed
the time of day when not too preoccupied, and the newspaper boy no
longer clutched for his penny. Jacob generally met the melancholy man
at the corner of the avenue and walked to the station with him. And he
still grew roses and worshipped them.

On the way to the station, on this particular morning, he amazed his
friend.

"Richard," he said, "I shall not travel to the City with you to-day.
At least I shall not start with you. I shall change carriages at
Wendley, as I did once before."

"The devil!" Richard exclaimed.

They were passing the plate-glass window of a new emporium, and Jacob
paused to glance furtively at his reflection. He was an exceedingly
neat man, and his care for his clothes and person had survived two
years of impecuniosity. Nevertheless, although he passed muster well
enough to the casual observer, there were indications in his attire of
the inevitable conflict between a desire for adornment and the lack of
means to indulge it. His too often pressed trousers were thin at the
seams; his linen, though clean, was frayed; there were cracks in his
vigorously polished shoes. He looked at himself, and he was suddenly
conscious of a most amazing thrill. One of the cherished desires of
his life loomed up before him. Even Savile Row was not an
impossibility.

At the station he puzzled the booking clerk by presenting himself at
the window and demanding a first single to Liverpool Street.

The youth handed him the piece of pasteboard with a wondering glance.

"Your season ain't up yet, Mr. Pratt."

"It is not," Jacob acquiesced, "but this morning I desire to travel to
town first-class."

Whilst he waited for the train, Jacob read again the wonderful
letters, folded them up, and was ready, with an air of anticipation,
when the little train with its reversed engine came puffing around the
curve and brought its few antiquated and smoke-encrusted carriages
to a standstill. Everything went as he had hoped. In that familiar
first-class carriage, into which he stepped with beating heart, sat
Mr. Bultiwell in the farthest corner, with his two satellites, Stephen
Pedlar, the accountant, and Lionel Groome. They all stared at him in
blank bewilderment as he entered. Mr. Bultiwell, emerging from behind
the _Times_, sat with his mouth open and a black frown upon his
forehead.

"Good morning, all," Jacob remarked affably, as he sprawled in his
place and put his legs up on the opposite seat.

He might have dropped a bombshell amongst them with less effect. Every
newspaper was lowered, and every one stared at this bold intruder.
Then they turned to Mr. Bultiwell. It seemed fittest that he should
deal with the matter. Unfortunately, he, too, seemed temporarily
bereft of words.

"I seem to have startled you all a bit, what?" Jacob continued, with
the air of one thoroughly enjoying the sensation he had produced.
"I've got my ticket all right. Here you are," he went on, producing
it,--"first-class to Liverpool Street. Thought I'd like to have a look
at you all once more. Sorry to see you're not looking quite your old
self, Mr. Bultiwell. Nasty things, these bad debts, eh? Three last
week, I noticed. You'll have to be careful down Bristol way. Things
there are pretty dicky."

"It would be more becoming on your part, sir," Mr. Bultiwell
pronounced furiously, "if you were to hold your tongue about bad
debts."

Jacob snapped his fingers.

"I don't owe any man a farthing," he declared.

"An undischarged bankrupt--"

"Sold again," Jacob interrupted amiably. "Got my discharge last week."

Mr. Bultiwell found his tongue at the same time that he lost his
temper.

"So that's the reason you're butting in here amongst gentlemen whom
you've lost the right to associate with!" he exclaimed. "You think
because you're whitewashed by the courts you can count yourself an
honest man again, eh? You think that because--"

"Wrong--all wrong," Jacob interrupted once more, with ever-increasing
geniality. "You'll have to guess again."

Mr. Groome--the very superior Mr. Groome, who had married a relative
of Mr. Bultiwell's, and who occasionally wore an eyeglass and was seen
in the West End--intervened with gentle sarcasm.

"Mr. Pratt has perhaps come to tell us that it is his intention to
celebrate the granting of his discharge by paying his debts in full."

Jacob glanced at the speaker with the air of one moved to admiration.

"Mr. Groome, sir," he pronounced, "you are a wizard! You must have
seen right through into the breast pocket of my coat. Allow me to read
you a couple of letters."

He produced these amazing documents, leisurely unfolding the first.
There was no question of newspapers now.

"You will remember," he said, "that I came to grief because I stood
bondsman to my brother, who was out prospecting for oil lands in
America. 'Disgraceful speculation' Mr. Bultiwell called it, I think.
Well, this letter is from Sam:"

     Ritz-Carlton Hotel,
     New York.

     My dear Jacob,

     I cabled you this morning to prepare for good news, so don't
     get heart failure when you receive this letter. We've struck
     it rich, as I always told you we should. I sold the worse
     half of our holdings in Arizona for four million dollars last
     week, and Lord knows what we'll get for the rest. I've cabled
     you a hundred thousand pounds, to be going on with, to the
     Bank of England.

     Sorry you've had such a rough time, old chap, but you're on
     velvet for the rest of your life. Have a bottle with your
     best pal when you get this, and drink my health.

                    Cheerio!
                         Sam.

     P. S. I should say, roughly speaking, that your share of
     the rest of the land will work out at something like five
     million dollars. I hope you'll chuck your humdrum life now
     and come out into the world of adventure.

"It's a fairy tale!" Mr. Groome gasped.

"Let me see the letter," the accountant implored.

Mr. Bultiwell only breathed hard.

"The other communication," Jacob continued, unfolding a stiff sheet of
paper, "is from the Bank of England, and it is what you might call
short and sweet:"

     Dear Sir,

     We beg to inform you that we have to-day received a credit
     on your behalf, from our New York branch, amounting to one
     hundred thousand pounds sterling, which sum we hold at your
     disposal.

                    Faithfully yours,
                         BANK OF ENGLAND.
                              p. p. J. Woodridge Smith.

"One hundred thousand pounds! God bless my soul!" Mr. Bultiwell
gasped.

"I shall be at your office, Mr. Pedlar," Jacob announced, folding up
the letters, "at eleven o'clock."

"It is your intention, I presume," the accountant enquired, "to pay
your debts in full?"

"Certainly," Jacob replied. "I thought I had made that clear."

"A very laudable proceeding," Mr. Pedlar murmured approvingly.

The train was beginning to slacken speed. Jacob rose to his feet.

"I am changing carriages here," he remarked. "I am obliged to you all
for putting up with my company for so long."

Mr. Bultiwell cleared his throat. There was noticeable in his tone
some return of his former pomposity.

"Under the present circumstances, Mr. Pratt," he said, "I see no
reason why you should leave us. I should like to hear more about your
wonderful good fortune and to discuss with you your plans for the
future. If you are occupied now, perhaps this evening at home. My
roses are worth looking at."

Jacob smiled in a peculiar fashion.

"I have a friend waiting for me in the third-class portion of the
train," he replied. "Until eleven o'clock, Mr. Pedlar."




CHAPTER II


The melancholy man was seated in his favourite corner, gazing out at
the landscape. He scarcely looked up as Jacob entered. It chanced that
they were alone.

"Richard Dauncey," Jacob said impressively, as soon as the train had
started again, "you once sat in that corner and smiled at me when I
got in. I think you also wished me good morning and admired my rose."

"It was two years ago," Dauncey assented.

"Did you ever hear of a man," Jacob went on, "who made his fortune
with a smile? Of course not. You are probably the first. Look at me
steadfastly. This is to be a heart-to-heart talk. Why do you go about
looking as though you were the most miserable creature on God's
earth?"

Richard Dauncey sighed.

"You needn't rub it in. My appearance is against me in business and in
every way. I can't help it. I have troubles."

"They are at an end," Jacob declared. "Don't jump out of the window or
do anything ridiculous, my friend, but sit still and listen. You have
been starving with a wife and two children on three pounds a week.
Your salary from to-day is ten pounds a week, with expenses."

Dauncey shook his head.

"You are not well this morning, man."

Jacob produced the letters and handed them over to his friend, who
read them with many exclamations of wonder. When he returned them,
there was a little flush in his face.

"I congratulate you, Jacob," he said heartily. "You are one of those
men who have the knack of keeping a stiff upper lip, but I know what
you have suffered."

"Congratulate yourself, too, old chap," Jacob enjoined, holding out
his hand. "Exactly what I am going to do in the future I haven't quite
made up my mind, but this I do know--we start a fresh life from
lunch-time to-day, you and I. You can call yourself my secretary, for
want of a better description, until we settle down. Your screw will be
ten pounds a week, and if you refuse the hundred pounds I am going to
offer you at our luncheon table at Simpson's to-day, I shall knock you
down."

Dauncey apologised shamefacedly, a few minutes later, for a brief
period of rare weakness.

"It's the wife, old chap," he explained, as they drew near the
terminus. "You see, I married a little above my station, but there was
never any money, and the two kids came and there didn't seem enough
to clothe them properly, or feed them properly, or put even a trifle
by in case anything should happen to me. Life's been pretty hard,
Jacob, and I can't make friends. Or rather I never have been able to
until you came along."

They shook hands once more, a queer but very human proceeding in those
overwrought moments.

"Just you walk to the office this morning," Jacob said, "with your
head in the air, and keep on telling yourself there's no mistake about
it. You're going home to-night with a hundred pounds in bank notes in
your pocket, with a bottle of wine under one arm, and a brown paper
parcel as big as you can carry under the other. You're out of the
wood, young fellow, and you be thankful for the rest of your life that
you found the way to smile one morning. So long till one o'clock at
Simpson's," he added, as they stepped out on to the platform. "Hi,
taxi!"

Mr. Bultiwell came hurrying along, with a good deal less than his
usual dignity. He was not one of those men who were intended by nature
to proceed at any other than a leisurely pace.

"Pratt," he called out, "wait a minute. We'll share that taxi, eh?"

Jacob glanced over his shoulder.

"Sorry," he answered, "I'm not going your way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon after the opening of that august establishment, Jacob, not
without some trepidation, visited the Bank of England. At half-past
ten, he strolled into the warehouse of Messrs. Smith and Joyce,
leather merchants, Bermondsey Street, the firm for which he had been
working during the last two years. Mr. Smith frowned at him from
behind a stack of leather.

"You're late this morning, Pratt," he growled. "I thought perhaps you
had gone over to see that man at Tottenham."

"The man at Tottenham," Jacob remarked equably, "can go to hell."

Mr. Smith was a short, thin man with a cynical expression, a bloodless
face and a loveless heart. He opened his mouth a little, a habit of
his when surprised.

"I suppose it is too early in the morning to suggest that you have
been drinking," he said.

"You are right," Jacob acknowledged. "A little later in the day I
shall be able to satisfy everybody in that respect."

Mr. Smith came out from behind the stack of leather. He was wearing a
linen smock over his clothes and paper protectors over his cuffs.

"I don't think you're quite yourself this morning, Pratt," he observed
acidly.

"I am not," Jacob answered. "I have had good news."

Mr. Smith was a farseeing man, with a brain which worked quickly. He
remembered in a moment the cause of Jacob's failure. Oil might be
found at any time!

"I am very glad to hear it, Pratt," he said. "Would you like to come
into the office and have a little chat?"

Jacob looked his employer squarely in the face.

"Never so long as I live," he replied. "Just the few words I want to
say to you, Mr. Smith, can be said here. You gave me a job when I was
down and out. You gave it to me not out of pity but because you knew I
was a damned good traveller. I've trudged the streets for you, ridden
in tram-cars, 'buses and tubes, sold your leather honestly and
carefully for two years. I've doubled your turnover; I've introduced
you to the soundest connection you ever had on your books. Each
Christmas a clerk in the counting house has handed me an extra
sovereign--to buy sweets with, I suppose! You've never raised my
salary, you've never uttered a word of thanks. I've brought you in
three of the biggest contracts you ever had in your life, and you
accepted them with grudging satisfaction, pretended they didn't pay
you, forgot that I knew what you gave for every ton of your leather
that passed through my hands. You've been a cold, calculating and
selfish employer. You'll never be a rich man because you haven't the
imagination, and you'll never be a poor one because you're too stingy.
And now you can go on with your rotten little business and find
another traveller, for I've finished with you."

"You can't leave without a week's notice," Mr. Smith snapped.

"Sue me, then," Jacob retorted, as he turned away. "Put me in the
County Court. I shall have the best part of a million to pay the
damage with. Good morning to you, Mr. Smith, and I thank Providence
that never again in this life have I got to cross the threshold of
your warehouse!"

Jacob passed out into the street, whistling lightly. He was beginning
to feel himself.

Half an hour later, seated in the most comfortable easy chair of Mr.
Pedlar's private office, a sanctum into which he had never before been
asked to penetrate, Jacob discussed the flavour of a fine Havana cigar
and issued his instructions for the payment of his debts in full. Mr.
Stephen Pedlar, a suave, shrewd man of much versatility, congratulated
himself that he had, at all times during his connection with Jacob,
treated this erstwhile insignificant defaulter with the courtesy which
at least had cost him nothing.

"Most interesting position, yours, Pratt," the man of figures
declared, loitering a little over the final details. "I should like to
talk it over with you sometime. What about a little lunch up in the
West End to-day?"

Jacob shook his head.

"I am lunching with a friend," he said. "Thank you very much, all the
same."

"Some other time, then," Mr. Pedlar continued. "Have you made any
plans at all for the future?"

"None as yet worth speaking of."

"You are a young man," the accountant continued. "You must have
occupation. If the advice of a man of the world is worth having, count
me at your disposal."

"I am very much obliged," Jacob acknowledged.

"I can be considered wholly impartial," Mr. Pedlar went on, "because
I have no direct interest in whatever you may choose to do with your
money, but my advice to you, Mr. Pratt, would be to buy a partnership
in one of the leading firms engaged in the industry with which you
have been associated."

"I see," Jacob reflected. "Go into business again on a larger scale?"

"Exactly," the accountant assented, "only, go into an established
business, with a partner, where you are not too much tied down. You'll
want to enjoy yourself and see a little of the world now. A bungalow
down the river for the summer, eh? A Rolls-Royce, of course, and a
month or so on the Riviera in the winter. Plenty of ways of getting
something out of life, Mr. Pratt, if only one has the means."

Jacob drew a deep sigh and murmured something noncommittal.

"My advice to you," his mentor continued, "would be to enjoy
yourself, get value for your money, but--don't give up work
altogether. With the capital at your command, you could secure an
interest in one of the leading firms in the trade."

"Were you thinking of any one in particular?" Jacob asked quietly.

Mr. Pedlar hesitated.

"To tell you the truth, Mr. Pratt," he admitted candidly, "I was.
I know of a firm at the present moment, one of the oldest and most
respected in the trade--I might almost say the most prominent
firm--who would be disposed to admit into partnership a person of
your standing and capital."

"You don't, by any chance, mean Bultiwell's?"

The accountant's manner became more earnest. He had the air of one who
releases a great secret.

"Don't mention it, Pratt, whatever you do," he begged. "Mr. Bultiwell
would probably be besieged by applications from people who would be
quite useless to him."

"I shall not tell a soul," Jacob promised.

"You see," his companion went on, watching the ash of his cigar for a
moment, "the Mortimers and the Craigs have both come to an end so far
as regards participation in the business. Colonel Craig was killed
playing polo in India, and had no sons, and old Mortimer, too, had
only one son, who went into the diplomatic service. That leaves Mr.
Bultiwell the sole representative of the firm, and though he has, as
you know, a great dislike for new associations, it is certainly too
much responsibility for one man."

"The Mortimer and Craig interests have had to be paid out, I suppose?"
Jacob enquired.

"To a certain extent, yes," Mr. Pedlar admitted. "That is where the
opportunity for new capital comes in."

"I have made no plans yet," Jacob declared, rising to take his leave.
"If you like to place the figures before me within the course of the
next week or so, and the suggested terms, I might consider the
matter--that is, if I decide to go into business at all."

"I can't conceive a more comfortable position for a young man with
your knowledge of the trade," Mr. Pedlar said, as he wished his guest
good morning. "You shall have all the figures placed before you. Good
morning, and once more my heartiest congratulations, Mr. Pratt."




CHAPTER III


At twelve o'clock, Jacob was in Regent Street, and at one o'clock, in
a new blue serge suit, shirt, collar and tie of the latest pattern, he
was dividing his time between admiring his reflection in the mirror
and waiting in the entrance hall of Simpson's. Dauncey's coming was,
in its way, pathetic. With a pessimism engendered by years of
misfortune, he had found it impossible to preserve throughout the
morning the exultation of those first few minutes with Jacob in the
railway carriage. He entered the restaurant and came towards his
friend with a feverish light in his eyes and a trembling of the lips
which the latter only too well understood.

"It's all right, old fellow," Jacob assured him emphatically. "Throw
in your hat with mine. Here's our table--two cocktails waiting, you
see, and a bottle of the best the place has--I tell you the old
gentleman in Threadneedle Street parted without a murmur. I'm simply
bursting with money--Steady, old chap!"

In the crowd of people waiting for their tables, they were little
noticed, these two--Dauncey struggling against the faintness, the
rising in his throat, the strange moisture in his eyes, Jacob talking
nonsense as hard as he could and affecting to disregard these unusual
conditions. Soon he had his friend safely seated opposite him, forced
him to drink his cocktail, gave cheerful orders to the waiter, and
produced a brand new pocketbook, which he laid upon the table.

"Richard," he announced, "there's a hundred pounds in that. Away with
it, pocketbook and all. Now put the soles of your feet firmly on the
ground and think what you're going to say to Nora when you get home.
You've stood up against some nasty knocks. Now just tell yourself that
they're all over. We'll take a feast home to-night. Waiter, open the
wine. By Jove, I've heard that pop for other fellows often enough, but
not one for myself for two years and more."

"Jacob," Dauncey faltered, "I can't say a word, but I'm all right. And
God bless you," he added, raising his glass and drinking. "God bless
you, Jacob! You're a pal."

After that, the thing was accepted as part of their lives, and they
talked reasonably.

"This afternoon," Jacob confided, "I am going to be measured for half
a dozen suits of clothes. I am going to prowl about Bond Street and
gratify the longings of a lifetime for variegated hosiery. At five
o'clock, Richard, I shall call for you at your office. By the bye, you
had better ask them how soon they can let you go."

"They won't worry about that," Dauncey answered, a little bitterly.
"Every Saturday for months has been a nightmare to me, for fear I'd
get the sack. They don't think I'm smart enough for my job there--not
smart enough even for three pounds a week!"

"Just let them know what you think about them, for a change," Jacob
enjoined. "Three pounds a week, indeed! Tell them you've accepted a
post at five hundred a year with a financier who needs your advice
with his investments. That'll give them something to think about!"

"It will!" Dauncey admitted, with a smile. "They'll think I've gone
mad."

"Let 'em think what they choose," Jacob insisted. "You come out of it
with your nose in the air and leave your office coat behind for the
errand boy. They'll always be worried to think that you must have been
a great deal smarter than they gave you credit for."

"I'll do my best," Dauncey promised.

"I shall call for you in my motor-car," Jacob continued; "we shall
make purchases on our way, and we shall return to Marlingden in state.
Thank heavens, Dick, for small ambitions! Just for the moment, I feel
that nothing could make me happier than to be driven down the village
street, pull up at the shops on the way home, and spend a few
five-pound notes where I've had to look twice at a shilling."

Dauncey smiled with the air of a man who sees more wonderful things.

"That's all very well in its way, old fellow," he admitted, "but
to appreciate this absolutely you ought to be married. I can think
of nothing but Nora's face when I tell her--when I show her the
pocketbook--when she begins to realise! Jacob, it's worth all the
misery of the last few years. It's worth--anything."

Jacob's face glowed with sympathy, but he made a brave attempt to
whistle under his breath a popular tune.

"Fact of it is, old chap," he said, as he gripped the bottle for
support and watched the bubbles rise in Dauncey's glass, "we are both
altogether too emotional."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jacob's programme, for the remainder of the day, was carried out very
nearly as he had planned it. The car was hired without difficulty, and
the sensation created in the village shops by his arrival in it, his
lavish orders and prompt payment, was ample and gratifying. Mrs.
Harris alone seemed curiously unmoved when he confided to her the
story of this great change in his circumstances. She who had been all
kindness and sympathy in the days of his misfortune listened to the
story of his newly arrived wealth with a striking absence of
enthusiasm.

"You'll be giving up your rooms now, I suppose?" she observed with a
sigh. "Want to go and live in the West End of London, or some such
place."

Jacob extended his arm as far as possible around her ample waist.

"Mrs. Harris," he said, "no one else in the world could have looked
after me so well when I was poor. No one else shall look after me now
that I am rich. If I leave here, you and Harris must come too, but I
don't think that I shall--not altogether. There are the roses, you
see."

"And what's in that cardboard box?" she asked suspiciously.

"A black silk dress for you," Jacob replied. "You'll give me a kiss
when you see it."

"A black silk dress--for me?" Mrs. Harris faltered, her eyes agleam.
"I don't know what Harris will say!"

"There's a bicycle at the station for him," Jacob announced. "No more
two-mile trudges to work, eh?"

Mrs. Harris sat down suddenly and raised her apron to her eyes. Jacob
made his escape and crossed the road. It had seemed to him that he
must have exhausted the whole gamut of emotions during the day, but
there was still a moment's revelation for him when the pale, shy,
little woman whom he had known as his friend's wife came running out
to greet him with shining eyes and outstretched hands.

"Mr. Pratt!" she cried. "Is it all true?"

"It's all true, and more of it," he assured her. "Your man's set up
comfortably for life, and I am a starving millionaire. Anything to
eat?"

She laughed a little hysterically.

"Why, there's everything in the world to eat, and to drink, too, I
should think," she answered. "What they must have thought of you two
men in the shops, I can't imagine! Come into the dining-room, won't
you? Dick's opening some wine."

Then followed the second feast of the day, at which Jacob had to
pretend to be unconscious of the fact that his host and hostess were
alternately ecstatically happy and tremulously hysterical. They all
waited upon themselves and ate many things the names of which only
were familiar to them. Dauncey opened champagne as though he had been
used to it all his life. Jacob carved chickens with great skill, but
was a little puzzled as to the location of caviare in the meal and
more than a little generous with the _pâté-de-foie-gras_. The
strawberries and real Devonshire cream were an immense success, and
Mrs. Dauncey's eyes grew round with pleasure at the sight of the boxes
of bonbons and chocolates. Afterwards the two men wandered out into
the garden, a quaint strip of uncultivated land, with wanton beds of
sweet-smelling flowers, and separated from the meadow beyond only by
an untrimmed and odoriferous hedge, wreathed in honeysuckle. Over
wonderful cigars, the like of which neither of them had ever smoked
before, they talked for a moment or two seriously.

"What are you really going to do with your money, Jacob?" Dauncey
asked. "And where do I come in? I do hope I am going to have a chance
of earning my salary."

Jacob was silent for a few moments. In the half light, a new sternness
seemed to have stolen into his face.

"Richard," he said, "you've seen men come out of a fight covered with
scars,--wounds that burn and remind them of their sufferings. Well,
I'm rather like that. I was never a very important person, you know,
but in the old days I was proud of my little business and my good
name. It hurt me like hell to go under. It was bad enough when people
were kind. Sometimes they weren't."

"I know," Dauncey murmured sympathetically.

"My scars are there," Jacob went on. "If I had such a thing, Dick, I
should say that they had burned their way into my soul. I haven't made
any plans. Don't think that I am going to embark upon any senseless
scheme of revenge--but if this promise of great wealth is fulfilled, I
have some sort of a fancy for using it as a scourge to cruelty, or for
giving the unfortunate a leg up where it's deserved. There are one or
two enterprises already shaping themselves in my mind, which might be
brought to a successful conclusion."

"Enterprises?" Dauncey repeated a little vaguely.

Jacob laid his hand upon his friend's shoulder. There was a strange
light in his eyes.

"Dick," he said, "you'd think I was a commonplace sort of fellow
enough, wouldn't you? So I am, in a way, and yet I've got something
stirring in my blood of the fever which sent Sam out to the far west
of America, more for the sheer love of going than for any hope of
making a fortune. I've lived an everyday sort of life, but I've had
my dreams."

"We're not going around the world treasure hunting, or anything of
that sort, are we?" Dauncey asked anxiously.

"All the treasure hunting we shall do," Jacob replied, with a little
thrill in his tone, "will be on the London pavements. All the
adventures which the wildest buccaneers the world has ever known might
crave are to be found under the fogs of this wonderful city. We shan't
need to travel far in the body, Dick. A little office somewhere in the
West End, a little ground bait which I know about, and the sharks of
the world will come stealing around us. There are seven or eight
million people in London, Dick. A detective I once knew--kind of
thoughtful chap he was--once told me that on a moderate computation
there were twenty-five thousand of them who would commit murder
without hesitation if they could get their hand deep enough into their
neighbour's pocket."

"Talking through his hat," Dauncey muttered.

"That is what we shall find out. Only remember this, Richard. I am
convinced that I possess in some degree that sixth sense the French
criminologist talked about,--the sense for Adventure. I've had to keep
my nose to the grindstone, worse luck, but there have been times when
I've lifted my head and sniffed it in the air. In queer places, too!
In the dark, shadowy streets of old towns which I have visited as a
commercial traveller, selling goods by day and wandering out alone by
night into the backwaters. I've felt the thrill there, Dick, trying to
look through the curtained windows of some of those lonely houses.
I've been brushed by a stranger in Fleet Street and felt it; looked
into a woman's mysterious eyes as she turned around, with a latchkey
in her hand, before a house in Bloomsbury. We shan't need to wander
far away, Richard."

"Seems to me," the latter observed, "that I am to play Man Friday
to--"

He suddenly stood rigid. He gripped his friend's arm, his lips a
little parted. He was listening in a paroxysm of subdued joy. From out
of the sitting-room window came faint sounds of melody.

"It's Nora," he murmured ecstatically. "It's the first time for years!
She's singing!"

He moved involuntarily towards the house. Jacob filled his pipe and
strolled across the way, homewards.




CHAPTER IV


Mr. Edward Bultiwell, of the House of Bultiwell and Sons, sat alone in
his private office, one morning a week or so later, and communed with
ghosts. It was a large apartment, furnished in mid-Victorian fashion,
and, with the exception of the telephone and electric light, destitute
of any of the modern aids to commercial enterprise. Oil paintings of
Mr. Bultiwell's father and grandfather hung upon the walls. A row of
stiff, horsehair chairs with massive frames stood around the room,
one side of which was glass-fronted, giving a view of the extensive
warehouse beyond. It was here that Mr. Bultiwell's ghosts were
gathered together,--ghosts of buyers from every town in the United
Kingdom, casting occasional longing glances towards where the
enthroned magnate sat, hoping that he might presently issue forth and
vouchsafe them a word or two of greeting; ghosts of sellers, too,
sellers of hides and skins from India and South America, Mexico and
China, all anxious to do business with the world-famed House of
Bultiwell. Every now and then the great man would condescend to
exchange amenities with one of these emissaries from distant parts.
Everywhere was stir and bustle. Every few minutes a salesman would
present himself, with a record of his achievements. All the time the
hum of voices, the clattering of chains, the dust and turmoil of
moving merchandise, the coming and going of human beings, all helping
to drive the wheel of prosperity for the House of Bultiwell!...

The ghosts faded away. Two old men were outside, dusting stacks of
leather. There was no one else, no sound of movement or life.
Bultiwell glanced at his watch, as he sat there and waited. Presently
he struck the bell in front of him, and a grey-haired bookkeeper
shuffled in.

"What time did Pedlar say Mr. Pratt would be round?" he asked harshly.

"Between eleven and twelve, sir."

Mr. Bultiwell glanced at his watch and grunted.

"Where's Mr. Haskall?"

"Gone round to the sale, sir."

"He got my message?" Mr. Bultiwell asked anxiously.

"I told him that he was on no account to buy, sir," the cashier
assented. "He was somewhat disappointed. There is a probability of a
rise in hides, and most of the pits down at the tannery are empty."

Mr. Bultiwell groaned under his breath. His eyes met the eyes of his
old employé.

"You know why we can't buy--at the sales, Jenkins," he muttered.

The man sighed as he turned away.

"I know, sir."

Then there was a little stir in the place. The two men left off
dusting; the clerks in the counting-house raised their heads
hopefully. Jacob Pratt arrived and was ushered into the presence of
the head of the firm. It was a trying moment for Mr. Bultiwell, but
he did his best. He wished to be patronising, kindly and gracious.
He succeeded in being cringing.

"Glad to see you, Pratt. Glad to see you," he said. "Try that
easy-chair. A cigar, eh? No? Quite right! Don't smoke much myself
till after lunch. Seen Pedlar this morning?"

"I've just come from his office," Jacob replied.

Mr. Bultiwell thrust his hands into his trousers pockets and leaned
back in his chair.

"Clever fellow, Pedlar, but not so clever as he thinks himself. I
don't mind telling you, Pratt, between ourselves, that it was entirely
my idea that you should be approached with a view to your coming in
here."

"Is that so?" Jacob observed quietly.
